we are on the verge of a new Revolution
RPA and automation is a new layer of
software people realize that they need
to automate routine tasks get a robot
for every person leave no manual
workflow behind we need to be bold the
fastest company will always win we scale
simultaneously across the globe net
retention it's 144 crazy stuff Tower
robots get the data already created from
the user interface itself emulating how
people work this is extremely powerful
we want to accelerate human achievement
be humble when you have the courage to
be bold people will take you seriously
our mission is to run all the manual
workflows ever
and solve a big issue for Humanity
so I'm super happy to have Daniel here
today I'm Philip buttery I'm a partner
with uh with Excel and we had the
privilege to lay the series in uh in the
company back in
2017 so some some time ago but uipass
was founded way before that you founded
the company in 2005 uh that's been a
long time a lot of key learnings and
today we'll we'll dive into some of the
the key things that you have learned
along the way but maybe just to to start
with uh Danielle so when you know can
you tell us why that kind of the
founding story of uipath and kind of how
did you
zoom in on on RPA
think I was always an entrepreneur at
heart
because of some unfortunate
circumstances I had to make a living for
myself since I was 19. so I did a lot of
gigs in post communist Romania including
like currency Arbitrage
I have started my first company which
was kind of a recruitment company when I
was 21 barely turning 21.
and then I discovered software and I
thought wow this is an easier way to
make a living so I've become
software engineer then I got employed by
Microsoft so I spent five years in
Seattle
which was a good experience for my
engineering expertise but it was kind of
terrible for my life I left a very
colorful like Eastern Europe Bucharest
to go into the cold Seattle
so I knew that I had to go back
and but after I I got my uh
understood really how you know company
like Microsoft is working and which is
interesting about Microsoft was that
they offer some kind of tribe like
experience so you in a way you feel safe
there but at least in my times it was
and I met some of the smartest people in
the world because between 2000 2005 they
were really
at the top of the of the game so going
back to Romania offered me no chance
that but to start my own company
and look I did you know what I know best
to
to survive so I did a lot of software
Consulting Outsourcing but always the
dream was to build a product
and the
Genesis of uipath was a very little
consumer tool
that offers some kind of one-click
dictionary for desktop so you can you
can click on every word on Windows
desktop and then we can extract the work
and then show a pop-up like search or
you know find the definition
and it was an early form of computer
vision because understanding every work
in a computer application where it's
positioned it's a much harder job that
you can imagine right now you cannot
just copy paste every so so it was an
engineering
gig we went very deeply hooking the
internal systems of Windows it doesn't
interesting stuff
but obviously it was a flop from a
marketing perspective but
we kept going and eventually from this
little thing we evolved into building
really our entire computer vision stack
and then we understood that you will
need the local no Code system in order
to facilitate using the power of this
computer vision thing that interactive
screens and then we discover the market
we started in the business process
Outsourcing Market
and then we got into really large
Enterprises and then we spread across
the world and then we did the IPO and
now we are here but I can trace back to
the first line of code which was really
that one for this little application
and along the way how much did you learn
from your customers like when you were
when you started as a an Outsourcing
business and trying to find your way
into a product how important was it for
you to kind of listen to your customers
and try to in fact should be versus you
having your own vision of what the the
product should should be
I think that was
some kind of my biggest transformation
in
in how I think about building products
so I started as a software engineer
working for a really large corporation I
was completely
shielded from customers I never met a
customer in my life in Microsoft
so I came with kind of the same approach
in building this business
and I persisted in that approach I am
right and they are wrong if I bring
these new features they will finally be
enlighted
but it's a transformation and I can give
you some pointers so first
we uh
from this little consumer program
we got to a small isv from us and they
uh they were doing some kind of banking
software
and what they did was to read the
screens of a teller machine you know you
used to go to the bank and cash
you'll get some money or cash a check
and this craze this machines were not
connected to the banking system so they
were reading the screens
and then populate the banking software
so it was a very early form of RPA and
they came to us and tell us
guys you have this little thing that
works very well with the screen and it
was the best in the world really
yet we just need this one not the entire
application that you built and you are
so proud of
and it was funny because I and I asked
so he asked for a license
and I thought how much can I ask this
guy
so I thought you know I had you know
just I would have known I said ten
thousand dollars so you have an
unlimited next day they wire the money
honestly
the entire revenue from that other
application was maybe a hundred dollars
at the time
and that convenes me
we have two pivot into this so let's
build maybe this is easier for us let's
build like software components for other
software developers it's easier to
understand this market and then we
started to build this Library
and then next week we were having some
few interesting customers that were
telling us guys it's very difficult for
us to use code to use like c-sharp or
JavaScript or whatever to build process
automation we need something simpler and
this is how we turn into low code no
code so we built the local no code
platform
and then we got another it was a Lucky
Strike honestly I would have nowhere we
got a really big customer in BPO
industry when I had no idea what even
BPO is really zero idea and they they
wanted to use our software
in this nascent RPA industry
and before us they were using one of our
competitors
but they were really kind of stiffer in
their mind they were not flexible to the
customer demand and they were searching
really
via the Internet like a software that
it's easy to use and create some process
Automation and they call us in Romania
and we went to India for like two three
months to do a prototype
and it was the aha moment when he really
understood wow this is the market we
hope for we were just kids so far we
were in a playground but this is a
serious thing and we understood that
what does it need
to scale a business as a software
engineer maybe this is also interesting
I never understood the idea of scale in
an Enterprise at least you can make
you can make easy prototypes or even
little products that can help a small
group of people or individuals but
scaling across an Enterprise it's a
freaking different thing
so this is what we started to learn with
this guy so we've built our
orchestration software that can deliver
hundreds and thousands of automation
scale and you can monitor them you can
do all sorts of things but that was
instrumental we couldn't I didn't
Envision this
and then everything it's you are in a
very lucky position if you don't have to
invent and reinvent yourself every year
and you just listen to the customers and
your job is just to prioritize
understand what are your best customers
what are the best segments prioritize to
their needs and this is what we did it
was simple
and you still do it today like what
percent of your time today do you spend
with customers
I still spend the significant percentage
I
during you know all these years I built
amazing relationship with the
some of our biggest customers we I call
them friends we go to dinners we we had
amazing experiences and it's a
trusted relationship between us and they
are not afraid to call me
so for instance I
last week I had a call with um
one of our first customers
a huge
advertising agency and this guy and we
are really good friends we play tennis
together it's so told me Daniel I'm
disappointed in in what you guys are
doing you lost touch with us you just go
only for Revenue you go to different
business units you don't help me
consolidate what we have you try to
overcome go to sea level and look to me
it wasn't uh was it really it was a
powerful moment when you realize you are
on the wrong track so you are always
customers always help you go back to
your core roots and building something
that matters
yeah that that that makes a lot of sense
I think that that is one of the most
important learning probably of uh of the
journey well one other fascinating
aspect about the the story of UI passage
the speed at which the RPA category was
created I mean if you look back like six
years ago no one knew about RPA I mean I
still remember uh when we did the
diligence on the series a I spoke to the
cob Dev person of the very large
software company and I was starting to
talk about robotic process Automation
and the person said told me well we
don't we don't invest in robots in
robotics like what is this about so
that's what's basically the state of RPA
six years ago today it's top of mind for
all the Fortune 500 cios so could you
tell us more like how uh how this
category came together
um and kind of what were the ingredients
that made it happen and what are their
learnings and that you would and the
advice you would give Founders in this
room who are aspiring to create their
own category as well
well let me start with the last question
because I
I don't think that the desire to make a
category it's the right approach to
build software
I think it's a sign of arrogance I want
to build a new category
it's a
I think it's gonna clutter your mind if
you feel you feel it's you feel too much
you put too much pressure on you if you
play tennis and you are a young guy and
say I have to win Wimbledon you are not
gonna win Wimbledon you just have to go
and play for the moment for the joy of
doing things so even the mere idea of I
want to build a category is gonna
prevent you for building a cutting you
build categories because it's the right
timing there is the right moment in life
and you are somehow chosen to be in that
place that's the way people build
categories and
we can look to numerous examples
what happened in
RPA
and there was a moment when the
business process Outsourcing industry
matured enough so they were at the point
where they couldn't
reap more benefits for their clients
one of their core proposition is that
every year they will deliver
savings for their clients like five to
seven percent so they were in a position
where it was very hard to do all sorts
of
process engineering thing human process
engineering to optimize and deliver so
they were desperate to get into
automation so they were willing to take
bets on very small companies
so this is that was one of the that was
why the market was ripe at that point
but it was also a technology condition
that that was very interesting that
happened at that time it was the the big
event of AI that happened one of the big
moment was
2011 2012 when uh I think the image
recognition you know take a giant leap
because of the cloud and mobile phones
and all these new pictures that were
uploaded people build software to
recognize images we took this type of
piece of software and we apply it to
desktop and we were capable of
recognizing all the objects on the
desktop and that was instrumental for
BPO industry because they were using
kind Citrix to access their client
system
so in order to automate something over
Citrix or any remote desktop on a
virtual environment you have to do only
computer vision basically like a human
user so he had this really good
technology at that point and the market
was arrived so that that was it always I
think there should be like a goldilock
condition there should be more
conditions in order to build a category
and it was a few companies that was
there so it was a
it was good it was good timing it was
really for us it was only about good
timing and did you feel like you had to
evangelize your vision to the analysts
at Gartner and Forester Etc or do you
feel like actually they came to you uh
what was kind of this push-pull process
in in the naming the quadrants Etc
over category was great robotic process
automation it attracted the attention
of people I think it helped in a way we
had a lot of detractors people say this
is not real automation
you just go via user interface you
should go only via apis it's all this
and it's it's interesting because it's
uh
customers don't care about purity
this is also another lesson guys it's
you if you aim to Purity it's the wrong
way to do
it's uh you need to aim for
kind of
something that is the meaning is like
life
Purity in a way boards everything around
it and you don't see you cannot do real
use cases
you need to write to do a right balance
even today I hear this it's only
have to be only ABI driven and then
generative AI came that emulates
people it's not API driven it's
different and it's so powerful when you
think about it
so I think it's really important to go
over your biases and create a tool that
works for the job at hand
yeah that's um that makes sense so let's
uh ship gear a bit and talk about hiring
and and culture so as you mentioned your
experience uh was as an engineer but at
some point you needed to hire people
outside of your field of knowledge you
know in sales marketing Etc and this is
something that usually technical founder
wrestle with like how do I how do you
hire that first VP sales or VP marketing
so I'm curious to understand like how
how do you think about it and uh what
did you learn along the way
well so I'll start with the biggest
learning
in uh and then I'll try to explain why
with some examples
to me and I strongly advise you guys on
this my biggest learning in hiring you
should go for chemistry versus expertise
I was
always under impression that you if you
can assemble a team of a players highly
experts in their domain this is gonna
work it is far away from working this is
a recipe for disaster
honestly you have this is why sometimes
I'm curious if this is go
they take three founders that barely met
each other but they are experts and they
expect this company is gonna work no
they will gonna argue to deaf and it's a
recipe for disaster
chemistry a team with
people that trust each other and that
have chemistry and they like to work
each other it's the best you can hope
for in life in software and product and
everything this is
so initially
our culture helped us
so I know we'll get to culture so I
saved it for later
but then I started to so I hired
initially really nice crazy people
sometimes their first job were people
that were in their own words like
corporate fugitives so they want a
different experience and it worked it
was magical
we had moments so for us at 10 pm it was
full you can see you know hundreds of
people working drinking wine and being
immersed into that it was one of the
most beautiful experience and it's
possible only by chemistry
but then at that point I didn't
understand that this is the recipe it
came to me just by luck and then I
started to hire the experts
and it's not working they might lay a
good foundation
but always the way they
people cannot change in life this is
also another big lesson people's
personality will never change so you see
to people that don't get along they will
never get along
this is always happening
so you hire someone with the personality
that's a little bit different but it's
not crazy different I'm not talking
about Psychopaths I'm talking people
different personalities but they change
they they create it's like
you bring a different ingredient to a
recipe it can change it sometimes for
good but most of the time you destroy it
so why and we've been through lots of
lots maybe too much we shoot ourselves
in the foot with so many changes in the
go to market
I now I consider more stability and
building going for the chemistry it's a
better longer
to our
you know way to
success
and uh
so I don't know if I have to go to
examples because many people you know
are no one but it's um
it's literally the the way to go so
don't don't guys don't ever compromise
on this and this is it's very hard
because sometimes I I had to be like uh
go to market leader having the regional
sales leaders under me directly it's a
freaking hard job to do
to do this because you have to go in all
the sales forecasts and calls and it's a
lot you have to put pressure on damage
so I wanted to get out of this
but if you get out of this and you don't
have the right person you lose touch
with customers you will start with the
teams you create a lot of unhappiness a
lot of people come to you and they
complain and it's the culture it's
it's
um you you you you basically created
dissonance into your into your company
and so how you mentioned the the culture
so it's based on four uh tenets today so
you have humble bolds immersed and fast
so how did you come up and when did you
come up with these four tenants have
they evolved over time and
um how important is that focus on
culture for the success of the company
so when we have started to see scale in
the company
we were looking so
I and my early co-founders we are big
fans of like Netflix culture and their
Netflix light so we understood the power
of culture in the company and we try to
Define our own culture
oh people come with many words you know
like Candor honesty we are open flexible
whatever so we we are having long
debates and we can come up with a long
list of things that we Define but again
I had done inspiration at some point
and I said to myself let's um reset this
exercise and I start just with one thing
what's the most if there is one word
that describes us and our culture what
shall that word be
and I realized that we are there
because some of our competitors were
arrogant that was one of the biggest
reason they let a small company
out of nowhere to steal their lunch
because they were arrogant
so I said the opposite of arrogance
it's probably what works the best
and then I said let's let's be humble
this is humble should Define we should
always stay humble it's such a powerful
concept it doesn't mean that we are
humble because nobody is truly humble
but to me culture is more like a
framework of operating you aspire
to be something you are not something
but all you filter all your decisions
what your interactions by your values
so Hamad is very powerful because makes
you listen to others
which again if you are not really that
of a genius and you don't suck all the
air in the room
you have to listen to the others
collective intelligence it's most of the
time better than your own
so this is this is always my style I am
I very rarely make decisions that I
enforce on people most of the time they
change my mind so the power being humble
gives you the power to change your mind
I make decisions against the group of
people that I trust very rarely only
when I am 100 convicted this is the
right way when I have the gut feeling
when I tell them guys this is against my
heart I will die I will reap my heart if
you don't do this
and they will do this
and so how much it's extremely powerful
and also you need to be bold in life
because if you Aspire for little things
you'll achieve Little Things
so you have to be bold and you have to
go you have to be fast because
you know the fastest company will always
create the biggest impact and the way to
operate always is to be immersed this is
what I liked in life I don't like
balance work life balance this is a
stupid thing for everyone
you have to be immersed and you stay
immersed in your life or in your work as
much as it's working but at some point
you are exhausted and you get back to
the other thing and you immerse in the
other thing but this is how
I see
in general I see a good way to conduct
your life
and so one point that you mentioned was
I think very uh you know particularly
important and striking to me was when
you say bold and the
you know the
the need to kind of set this very bold
uh very audacious targets and I remember
when we invested in of the you know in
the company I mean this is one of the
fastest growing software company of its
generation I mean you went from you know
one million five million 45 million to
175 million in Revenue uh which is kind
of an amazing ride and you always had
like these very ambitious goals which I
mean I would say like initially when you
say well we're going to grow from 5 to
50 million I would say like we've never
seen that like you know what if you do
20 or 25 that's already great but say no
like we're gonna do 50 and you ended up
you know being very close to that goal
so how how do you set this goals for
yourself in a way that is a stretch but
not but still achievable right and what
advice would you give founder in this
room uh in terms of thinking about the
goal and knowing what is an ambitious
goal that's going to motivate the team
and even if you fail short a bit short
it's still okay versus something that is
totally Out Of Reach and cr4 is going to
discourage everyone because you're going
to miss it by wide margin like this is a
very fine balance and just accuracy how
you think about it I think this is
clearly the
the black magic of uh of running a
company that grows fast
because it's uh it's easy to be crazy
you know when I heard the masayoshi's
son saying you are not crazy enough
that's guys I am crazy
and I can be crazy enough but I'm gonna
burn billions of dollars I will overrun
the market with reps
and then they will step each other's
toes and they will be unhappy we will
burn hundreds of millions of dollars the
culture will sink and we will go
busted right so craziness doesn't work
we're super craziness the you said it
very well the fine balance works
but
I wish it's it's a thing that can work I
can give you an example how I have
chosen you know like in 2000
17 we were number
three in the market we have two bigger
companies ahead of us so we were like
finishing the year 17 with like 45
million dollars and the other guys were
maybe 70 50 something like this and I
knew they are growing maybe 50 so they
get to a hundred
and then I said to myself this is this
is shaping as a big category it's I felt
it it's huge
so it can absorb we can absorb we can
take a much bigger risk at that point we
were almost cash flow neutral
we've been cash flow neutral through a
lot of our existence until that moment
when I said this is it that's the market
is ready
the biggest company will get the Lion's
Share of the market it's worth you know
pressing the pedal and then I came to
the board maybe you remember remember
and you guys said again if you do if you
deliver 70 million dollars that would be
a great achievement starting from 45. we
talk about ARR to 70. and I said no guys
70 will still be the third in the market
will deliver 200.
and then everybody for time crazy
but I went to the sales leaders at that
point I I was still running all the
sales the Geo leaders myself
and I gave them this huge number and to
my delight they were not shocked they
thought I am crazy but they were not
shocked and they said
give give me at least a little bit of
time and I'll come with the number and
then
they committed so we had this concept
neck on the line in terms of commitments
and they collectively committed to 150
million dollars and then I knew this is
it we can capacitate to 200 million
dollars the entire sales team because we
will achieve 150.
well we have achieved 175 and we burned
80 million dollars that year but it was
nothing really get to number one
position get in Gardener in everywhere
we won the market and they competition
never caught us after the Gap only
increased it was a very well in timed
investment but next year when I try to
do the same it was a freaking disaster
so this is why we need to be very
cautious I want it from 175 to go to
600.
look on the capacity and I said to
myself
we can get that minimum to 450. okay we
can board 150 million dollars that's
nothing we had half a billion in the
bank at that point we raised a big
series deep
and uh
but the problem was that we didn't have
the right controls in place
in that year and we grew significantly
to like 375 or something like it's just
amazing growth but we burned 400 million
dollars
and that was not fun
because you only and we over hired
so that was really the moment when we've
been into diminishing returns and it
could have been very costly for us
because in 2019 we were one of the rare
companies that has done around the
layoffs and it's such a big blow to the
culture especially when you are alone in
the market
like nobody was there uipath was firing
10 percent of their people it was a
six-month terrible blow and then covet
hit
but again we were lucky because we've
done this restructuring so you are well
better preparing covet
our main competitor at that time were
trying to catch us especially with
SoftBank money so they were pouring a
lot of money into the into everything
sales marketing build a bloated company
and coffee it and they are I know
you're in a much better position your
Nimble already I learned my lessons
and then 2020 was an amazing year
in where we still grew like 80 percent
we kept the cost under control we third
guys from 400 million blood to cash flow
neutral in just one year it's almost
unheard of while growing 80 percent
well uipath has broken uh many rules et
cetera so now I I don't have any
benchmarks anymore of what's what's
possible just trust your your Founders
um so I mean as you think about this
journey between you know kind of
being Breakeven burning a lot of money
then being you know a cash flow positive
again and Rule of 40 company like how do
you how would you advise Founders to
kind of manage and think about the cash
burn and is the rule of 40 something
that only applies for large public
companies it's something that is
relevant when you're a young company
like how how how do you think about it
I think it depends on the stage
for me as uh so I bootstrap the company
for almost 10 years
10 years actually we raised our first
round of investment in July 2015 I
started the company in 2005. there was
bootstrap when you bootstrap a company
you need to understand cash flow because
otherwise you die
so I was very much cash flow attentive
and it's part of my DNA I always I feel
it's a little bit a little bit against
my nature to just go on board huge
amounts of money
but you need to understand again the
right moment when you have to board
there is the this uh you know a guide
that I admire is Frank sutman uh CEO of
snowflake and he has a great book called
ampitup or something I think it's a it's
almost like uh
recipe for building a startup because
this guy he's an operator I'm not an
operator it's a different beasts we are
talking but as an operator he describes
very well when you have to push the
pedal when you have to increase the Reps
how to think about it is an awesome guy
and even in person let me tell you an
interesting story with him to see how
you know truly operator thing
so I and Brandon who chose at that time
my chief of staff and very good friends
we are very close we went to met him it
was before his snowflake between it was
between service now and snowflake
and Brendan introduced himself and he
said
I'm Brendan dear you know Daniel's chief
of staff and this guy said Frank said I
will fire you next day it was fun yes
what's this draw it's a fluffy job
what's
Chief of Staff it doesn't exist he
thinks also customer success it's a
fluffy job and it doesn't exist and to
certain extent I agree with this but
it's a very hardcore thinking it's kind
of interesting to see it's not me but
it's an interesting to watch and learn
what you can apply to
to your own to your own thing
where we were I got lost in my mind well
good news is Brandon is still with the
companies
okay well great well thank you that was
um that was amazing
um Danielle so I was just uh trying if I
try to summarize the key uh takeaway
they should they should appear here so
along this journey I think as you
mentioned listen and learn from your
customers super important role uh really
be thoughtful about when and how to use
your cash so I think this rule of 40 is
good to have in mind but you need to
know when is the right time to really
involve
um you know involve your your resources
and really commit to to the growth
evolve your leadership style as we just
discuss focus on culture and be bold but
not too crazy
I think that's uh that's the learning
thank you uh I don't think we have time
for questions unfortunately but thank
you very much thank you Daniel this was
a amazing discussion
[Applause]